##1 Introduction

The cleanliness of air is very important to all living organisms on earth, to have a healthy life. Air pollution has become an important environmental issue in recent decades. Monitoring and predicting air pollution is crucial to empower individuals to make informed decisions that protect their health. The air quality index (AQI), which is an important indicator of air quality, helps to determine pollution level. AQI transforms complex air quality data of various pollutants into a single number (index value), nomenclature and color. The project, “Air Quality Index Prediction” will provide insights on air quality from real time data collected from AccuWeather.com website. Data is being collected four times a day at fixed time intervals at five different places in Chattogram city. In this project, we aim to estimate the current or future Air Quality Index (AQI) using machine learning approach by analyzing pollutant concentrations and analyzing the data to provide an insight of the air quality.

##2 Objective:

Chattogram is one of the fastest growing cities of Bangladesh with population 5.514 million (2024). Unplanned urbanization and growing industrial sector are contributing to air pollution in Chattogram city which is causing serious health issues to a larger resident. Our project will basically depend on real time pollutants level to calculate Air Quality Index in the industrial area of Chattogram. Analysis of data will help to identify the most polluted area and contributing factors to air pollution. So that, proactive measures can be taken to minimize pollution and also creating awareness at the individual level.

##3 Background and motivation:

Cities of Bangladesh are often in the headlines for breaking records in air pollution. Recent study has shown that pollutants concentration in Bangladesh is 15 times higher than the WHO guideline. This situation is comparatively worse in cities. In the recent time, deaths registered that are being caused for respiratory disease can’t be a coincidence. This is an emergency situation and an environment crisis which is not addressed properly, which is happening most probably because it is an invisible problem and lack of monitoring stations. Even though, it’s now not a matter of concern among us, data can be used to represent completely different scenario. By using machine learning approach, analysis of data in this respect, can help to address the concern about air pollution in the business capital of Bangladesh so that the people and all other living beings can have a healthier environment to live.
